Tools Recipes (#23)
godot-rust/gdext-book: src/recipes/tooling-engine-singleton.md

<!--
  ~ Copyright (c) godot-rust; Bromeon and contributors.
  ~ This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
  ~ License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
  ~ file, You can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

> # Singleton (Anti)-Pattern

Reviewer: Ok, enough negativity 😛 The admonish block is more than enough to mention the "anti-pattern".

Furthermore, this title should match the summary one: "Engine singletons". With this capitalization.

> It is important for you to understand the [Singleton (anti)-pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern) tos
> properly utilize this system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important for you to understand the [Singleton (anti)-pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern) to
properly utilize this system.
```

> ```admonish help

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```admonish info title="Controversy"
```

> Singleton is often referred to as an anti-pattern as a criticism to its use. This is because it violates several good practice
> recommendations for clean, modular code. However it is also a tool that can be used to solve certain design problems. As such,
> it is used internally by Godot, and it is available to tool developers in Godot Rust as well.
> 
> [Read more about criticisms here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern#Criticism)

Reviewer: Made it a bit more concise, and corrected "Godot Rust" to "godot-rust".
```suggestion
Singleton is often referred to as an anti-pattern, because it violates several good practices for clean, modular code. However, it is
also a tool that can be used to solve certain design problems. As such, it is used internally by Godot, and is available to godot-rust
users as well.

Read more about criticisms [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern#Criticism).
```

```

> An Engine Singleton is registered through [`godot::engine::Engine`](https://godot-rust.github.io/docs/gdext/master/godot/engine/struct.Engine.html).
> 
> Custom Engine Singletons in Godot:
> 
> - are Object types
> - are always accessible to GDScript (and other available languages like C#)
> - must be manually registered and unregistered in the `LevelInit::Scene` step
> 
> Godot does have _many_ built-in singletons provided internally and exposed to GDScript. You can find a full list
> [here](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_@globalscope.html#properties)

Reviewer: Capitalization and backticks for symbols.

Please also use links at the end rather than inline, for readability. The references be moved to the end of the page as well.
```suggestion
An engine singleton is registered through [`godot::engine::Engine`][api-engine].

Custom engine singletons in Godot:

- are `Object` types
- are always accessible to GDScript and GDExtension languages
- must be manually registered and unregistered in the `InitLevel::Scene` step

Godot provides _many_ built-in singletons in its API. You can find a full list [here][godot-singleton-list].

[api-engine]: https://godot-rust.github.io/docs/gdext/master/godot/engine/struct.Engine.html
[godot-singleton-list]: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_@globalscope.html#properties
```

## Defining a Singleton

Defining a singleton is the same as registering a custom class.

```rust
#[derive(GodotClass)]
#[class(tool, base=Object)]
struct MyEditorSingleton {
    #[base]
    base: Base<Object>,
}

#[godot_api]
impl IObject for MyEditorSingleton {
    fn init(base: Base<Object>) -> Self {

>         // you may want to omit this by adding "init" to the #[class(...)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Without custom initialization, you can also use `#[class(init)]`.
```

        Self { base }
    }
}

#[godot_api]
impl MyEditorSingleton {
    #[func]
    fn foo(&mut self) {}
}
```

## Registering a singleton

Registering singletons is done during the `InitLevel::Scene` stage of initialization.

> To achieve this, we can customize our init/shutdown routines by overriding ExtensionLibrary trait methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve this, we can customize our init/shutdown routines by overriding `ExtensionLibrary` trait methods.
```

```rust
struct MyExtension;

unsafe impl ExtensionLibrary for MyExtension {
    fn on_level_init(level: InitLevel) {
        if level == InitLevel::Scene {
            // The StringName identifies your singleton and can be used later to access it.
            Engine::singleton().register_singleton(
                StringName::from("MyEditorSingleton"),
                MyEditorSingleton::new_alloc().upcast(),
            );
        }
    }

    fn on_level_deinit(level: InitLevel) {
        if level == InitLevel::Scene {
            // Unregistering is needed to avoid memory leaks and warnings, especially for hot reloading.
            Engine::singleton().unregister_singleton(StringName::from("MyEditorSingleton"));
        }
    }
}
```

## Calling from GDScript

> Now that your Engine Singleton is available (and once you've rebuilt and reloaded!) you should be able to access the singleton like so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that your singleton is available (and once you've recompiled and reloaded), you should be able to access it from GDScript like so:
```

```godot
extends Node

func _ready() -> void:
    MyEditorSingleton.foo()

> ```

Reviewer: For now, use `php` tags, better than no highlighting at all.

Also, remove the trailing blank line.

## Calling from Rust

You may also want to access your singleton from Rust as well. This can be done through
[this method](https://godot-rust.github.io/docs/gdext/master/godot/engine/struct.Engine.html#method.get_singleton)

```rust
godot::engine::Engine::singleton().get_singleton(StringName::from("MyEditorSingleton"));

> ```

Reviewer: Also here, please move link down as `[api-engine-getsingleton]`, and maybe split the `.get_singleton()` call to a 2nd line.

> ## Singletons and the SceneTree
> 
> Singletons cannot safely access the scene tree. At any given moment they may exist without a SceneTree being active.
> While it is technically possible to access the SceneTree through hacky methods, it is **highly recommended** to use a
> custom `EditorPlugin` for this purpose. As you can register a custom "Autoload Singleton" which is crucially different
> from an Engine Singleton in that it is a Node (or child type) instanced on the SceneTree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Singletons and the `SceneTree`

Singletons cannot safely access the scene tree. At any given moment, they may exist without a scene tree being active.
While it is technically possible to access the tree through hacky methods, it is **highly recommended** to use a
custom `EditorPlugin` for this purpose. As you can register a custom "Autoload Singleton" which is crucially different
from an Engine Singleton in that it is a Node (or child type) instanced on the SceneTree.
```

There is one sentence staring with "As", which is unusual. Can you relate it more clearly to the previous part?

Reviewer: Still open 🙂
